docs: Add "Develop and Deploy your own React monorepo app" blog post (#10490)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2018-12-15-develop-and-deploy-your-own-react-monorepo-app/index.md

---

> title: Develop & Deploy Your Own React Monorepo App in Under 2 Hours, Using Lerna, Travis & Now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 title: Publish Multiple Gatsby Sites in a Monorepo Using Lerna, Travis & Now
```

Author: I'd like to keep the keywords Develop and Deploy in the title, as it describes the content of my article better, referencing the way in which it's structured. 'Publish Multiple Gatsby Sites' doesn't capture it as much. Saying that, I'm happy to replace 'React' with 'Gatsby' as a means of emphasising our favourite highly performant site generator

Reviewer: Title should be more descriptive and a hook to understand what you would do at a glance, and "Publish Multiple Gatsby Sites" is more descriptive than "Develop & Deploy Your Own React[/Gatsby] Monorepo App". 

We don't use the language "Gatsby Monorepo App" anywhere else, and it's not clear immediately what this means and raises additional Qs. Are all Gatsby apps monorepos? Etc.

date: 2018-12-15
author: Andrico Karoulla

> tags:

Reviewer: please make an array

  - apps
  - web apps
  - applications
  - deployment
  - testing
  - CI
  - continuous integration
excerpt: Learn how to create a balanced Lasagna instead of a tangled mess of Spaghetti.
---

## Learn how to create a balanced Lasagna instead of a tangled mess of Spaghetti.

### Foreword

> Please put aside time for this tutorial and make sure you’ve got a good hour or two free from distractions. If I’ve done my job right, you’ll improve your general knowledge of web architecture. You’ll also be introduced to new tools whose strengths you can leverage in the wild. If you’ve used any, or all, of these tools before, then getting up and running won’t take as long. But for those unfamiliar with Lerna, Travis or Now, you’ll likely find a few traps along the way, as I did during my journey writing this tutorial. I’ve got a troubleshooting section at the end of the article for common problems, so refer to it at any time. That said, enjoy and I hope you gain a lot from this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 This tutorial will take about an hour to complete. If you're unfamiliar with Lerna, Travis or Now, you may run into a snafu or two, but you'll learn how to use these tools! I’ve included a troubleshooting section at the end of the article for common problems, so refer to it at any time.
```

Reviewer: This is less chatty and tighter.

Author: will condense the foreword a little

### Introduction

> If you work alone or in a small team, you’re likely to have started working on small programs that slowly grow complex and convoluted. Shit happens and you’ll soon find that your perfectly balanced Lasagna evolves into a heaped bowlful of Spaghetti.

Reviewer 2: are lasagna and spaghetti capitalized for a reason?

Author: yes they are, the reason is that my grammar is bad :)

Reviewer: Can we change "Shit" to "Crap"? I don't believe we have curse words on the Gatsby blog.

> Note: I'm running a [Gatsby workshop](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/gatsbyjs-workshop-develop-and-deploy-your-own-blog-tickets-52432622385?aff=GatsbyBlog) in London, February 2019.

Reviewer: Please include this at the end, not here. Also, please tweet this out and send us a link by DM -- we'll be sure to retweet this!

Author: can do, will be marketing it a little more in the new year!

> The same goes for those who have worked as part of a large company/team. Branding guidelines come in the form of css style-guides or reusable components. Separating the discrete packages from what’s shared becomes a hassle if everything’s stored together. You may even have to deal with several similar projects thrown about in different repos, which can be an arse-ache to keep track of. These are some of the problems monorepos solve.

Reviewer: LOL @ arse-ache, but let's go with "headache"

![Monorepo Diagram](./images/monorepo-diagram.jpeg)

A monorepo is an architectural design pattern that allows us to maintain several packages within a single repo. This reduces the complexity when dealing with packages that share in-house and third-party dependencies.

> Think of monorepos like a well-organised supermarket. Each aisle contains a particular kind of food, making it easy to navigate and find the item of food you want. Supermarkets also contain a variety of different foods so you don’t need to go to a series of specific shops to find your gluten-free, dairy-free banoffee pie (which is very much a [thing](https://glutenfreecuppatea.co.uk/2016/02/14/recipe-healthy-banoffee-pie-gluten-free-vegan-refined-sugar-free-dairy-free/)).

Reviewer 2: well I just looked up that pie :)

With monorepos the code is split into specific packages (aisles). Meaning you can easily navigate the project to find the component or module you want to work on. It also means not needing to maintain separate repos when making changes that affect multiple parts of your stack (the single shop).

Everything is accessible from a single place, while still being organised enough to navigate painlessly.
Enough with the theory, let’s move on to the tutorial, which is split into 2 sections: development and deployment.

> Development — We’ll configure an existing application, built with Gastby, into a monorepo. If you haven’t heard of Gatsby before, then take some time to [read up on it](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/). I won’t delve too much into its implementation details because it’s beyond the scope of this article. We’ll attend the lavish party that the great Gatsby throws for us and we won’t ask why or how they did it. Another tool we’ll use is [Lerna](https://github.com/lerna/lerna), which will manage the dependencies of our project. Lerna will also allow us to link packages together which we’ll use to share components.

Reviewer 2: Fun writing details. Love this

Reviewer 2: Oh, Gatsby is misspelled in this paragraph

Author: 😳

> Development — We’ll configure an existing application, built with Gastby, into a monorepo. If you haven’t heard of Gatsby before, then take some time to [read up on it](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/). I won’t delve too much into its implementation details because it’s beyond the scope of this article. We’ll attend the lavish party that the great Gatsby throws for us and we won’t ask why or how they did it. Another tool we’ll use is [Lerna](https://github.com/lerna/lerna), which will manage the dependencies of our project. Lerna will also allow us to link packages together which we’ll use to share components.

Reviewer: *Development* — We’ll configure an existing application, built with [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/), into a monorepo. 

Another tool we’ll use is [Lerna](https://github.com/lerna/lerna), which will manage the dependencies of our project. Lerna will also allow us to link packages together which we’ll use to share components.

Author: I can tighten the paragraph up, but I'd like to still emphasise that this article won't be covering the basics of Gatsby. That's important to see the reader's expection

> Deployment — After we’ve converted our app into a monorepo we’ll hook our GitHub account to Travis-CI and create a CI pipeline. The CI pipeline will test, build and deploy our application. W̵e̵’̵l̵l̵ ̵b̵e̵ ̵u̵s̵i̵n̵g̵ ̵H̵e̵r̵o̵k̵u̵ ̵̵to h̵andle-d̵e̵p̵l̵o̵y̵m̵e̵n̵t̵s ̵t̵o̵o̵l̵ ̵b̵e̵c̵a̵u̵s̵e̵ ̵i̵t̵’̵s̵ ̵e̵a̵s̵y̵ ̵t̵o̵ ̵u̵s̵e̵,̵ ̵f̵l̵e̵x̵i̵b̵l̵e̵ ̵a̵n̵d̵ ̵i̵n̵t̵e̵g̵r̵a̵t̵e̵s̵ ̵r̵e̵a̵l̵l̵y̵ ̵w̵e̵l̵l̵ ̵w̵i̵t̵h̵ ̵T̵r̵a̵v̵i̵s̵-̵C̵I̵.̵ I changed my mind after spending three days trying to get my Monorepo deployed with Heroku, and managed it in an hour with Now. So we’re using Now!

Reviewer: Please remove quotes. Btw, does this still work with Now v2?

Author: this issue gets solved by explicitly stating the version of Now being used from within the `now.json` file

There are a couple of caveats to address prior to beginning:

> Due to the scale of our demo site, you may feel that monorepos aren’t practical. You’ll be right in thinking that because a monorepo in this instance isn’t practical. There’ll be elements of duplication and rewriting that will seem counter productive. It’ll also seem like we’re over-engineering a simple site. The real learning comes from understanding how the pieces fit together on a small scale. You’ll be able to easily integrate monorepos at production level with your understanding of the fundamental concepts and underlying technologies.

Reviewer: Don't write defensively. Instead, say something like?

```suggestion
Due to the scale of our demo site, you may feel that monorepos aren’t practical. You’ll be right in thinking that because a monorepo in this instance isn’t practical. It may be more useful in general, for example if you're creating multiple Gatsby sites in your organization and want to share components easily.
```

Author: I'm not sure how I feel about this. The current paragraph describes, in detail, some of the arguments against using a monorepo for a site this small. I then proceed to provide a counter-argument as to why it would be useful to convert the application over regardless. I'd rather not remove the rationale

This tutorial deals with loads of small changes which make for plenty of opportunities for things to go wrong. I’ve tried making myself as clear as possible to prevent this but if you do come across issues then leave a descriptive commentI’ll do my best to respond, edit and improve this article. You can also find the [finished repo here](https://github.com/andrico1234/lerna-monorepo-finisher). There’s no shame in copying my code if you’re stuck.

I’m also assuming fundamental web dev knowledge including experience with React, Git and the command line.

> ### Part One: Justine (Development)

Reviewer: Why do the sections have names? Can we remove them please?

Reviewer: Part One and Part Two are fine

Author: A stylistic flourish found in a couple of my articles. I don't see a need to remove them

Reviewer: This is the Gatsby blog, so we have a particular editorial voice and level of profesisonalism. This is too informal.

Let’s begin! Navigate to an empty folder in the terminal and clone the repo by running the following command

`git clone git@github.com:andrico1234/lerna-monorepo-starter.git`

and navigate into the the `lerna-monorepo-starter` directory.

Go to your GitHub account and create a new repo, this’ll be the repo that you push the site to so that Travis can run the pipeline. For those who need a refresher on how to [create a new repo](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-new-repository/). You may have to run `git remote remove origin` so you can point the code to your newly created repo.

Run the code that GitHub outputs when creating a new repo:

```

> git remote add origin git@github.com:andrico1234/lerna-monorepo-runthrough.git

Reviewer: `lerna-monorepo-runthrough` or `lerna-monorepo-starter`?

Please be consistent

Go back to your IDE and you’ll see that we’re not pulling data from an external source. The data is being served locally via a couple of json files in the `data` directory. When we run the `develop` command Gatsby pulls the data from these json files and creates pages for them. You can take a look at how this being done by peeking inside of the `gatsby-node.js` file. This is because Gatsby builds the code and outputs a static site.

So imagine our application is starting to grow, the shop and the blog start intertwining with each other. You may not notice the lack of separation until its too late and your code is tangled tighter than the ivy across the side of your grandma’s cottage.

Let’s start splitting up our application. I’ll only be touching the surface of what Lerna is capable of, so I’d recommend checking out their repo to learn more. Install Lerna with `yarn global add lerna`. We need to create a file in the root directory called `lerna.json`. Add in the following:

> ```

Reviewer 2: We have some brand new ways of making file names and code types clear

file name using

```shell
```jsx:title=gatsby-config.js
```
at the top of the code snippet. 

type tabs
#10515

Reviewer 2: I'd recommend this, though it's still optional in the blog. We are requiring it in docs now

Author: thanks, i'll get that in!

{
  "lerna": "2.11.0",
  "packages": [
    "packages/*"
  ],
  "npmClient": "yarn",
  "useWorkspaces": true,
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

The above specifies the version of Lerna we’re using. We also let Lerna know where to find our packages, in this case the packages will be contained within a directory inside of `packages`. We specify that we’re using Yarn, the current version of our application and that we’re using Yarn Workspaces enables Lerna’s package hoisting. To enable Yarn workspaces, add the following to your `package.json` file.

```
{
  ...rest of file,
  "private": true,
  "workspaces": [
    "packages/*"
  ]
}
```

Once that’s been completed create a new `packages` directory in the root of the project. Create three additional directories inside of it so the structure looks like the following:

```
packages
 | blog
 | shared-ui
 | shop
```

The next step is to move the contents from our current application into their respective folders. All the files in our `components` folder will be moved to our `shared-ui` directory since we’d like to be able to use them anywhere throughout our codebase.

> [confirm with run through]We shouldn’t need to reinstall Gatsby to get our shared-ui components working, but we may need to install gatsby-link so the routing doesn’t break.

Reviewer: please remove note

`<a href={process.env.SHOP_URL}>Back to Shop</a>`

Protip: they’re in `shop/src/pages/index.js`, and `blog/src/pages/index.js`.

This will allow us to transition between our two sites. Do the same for the shop package and you’ll be able to use the site as normal. If `yarn run:all` still works and you can run `yarn build` for each package then commit and push the changes. In each package run `yarn serve` go to the correct port to double-check that everything displays correctly.

Congratulations, the site now behaves in exactly the same way as when we started. This might make it seem like monorepos have little use, but you’ll find that using a monorepo is a way of keeping packages independent from each other while easily reusing assets.

You can stop the tutorial now and you’ll have a working knowedge of when, how and why to use monorepos, but the latter half of this tutorial will show us how we can take things a step further. We’ll get a CI pipeline set up for our application and deploy it on success.

### Part Two: Claire (Deployment)

> Let’s take a second to reflect on where we are right now. We’ve managed to start with a single application with two discrete sections and split them apart in a monorepo. This is allows us to _separate the concerns_ and share reusable components.

Reviewer: this allows us, not "this is allows us"

`now alias <your randomly generated URL> <your chosen alias>`
I chose ‘lerna-monorepo-blog’ as my alias, so that one won’t be available for you to use, so choose your own. When you’ve run the command, there will be feedback saying that the alias was successfully created. If not, then it’s likely the command was written incorrectly or the alias is already in use by someone else. Once you’ve added an alias successfully for the blog, do the same for your shop package.

Even if you push everything forward now the site’s navigation will still be broken. The very last thing we need to do is add our alias URL as an environment variables in our `.env.production` file. In your blog package’s `.env.production` go ahead and add the following:

`BLOG_URL=https://<your chosen alias>.now.sh/`

Do the same for your shop url, commit and push. Congrats!

### Conclusion

> You should now be able to access the site and navigate easily between your shop and your blog. Great job! If things didn’t work out quite as planned then don’t sweat it. This tutorial is made of tiny moving parts which make for loads of opportunities for things to go wrong. I’ll try to make myself available to answer any messages left in the comments regarding any issues you come across.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 You should now be able to access the site and navigate easily between your shop and your blog. 
```

Author: why?

Reviewer: * No email address or contact info
* Implies the tutorial is buggy
* No comments on this blog

### Thanks for reading!

> Adding to your arsenal of Web Architecture tools is an excellent way of improving your capabilities as a developer or engineer. Monorepos aren’t perfect but it might just work for your next project. Good luck.

Reviewer 2: is web architecture capitalized?

Author: I'll change those to small caps!

Reviewer: This paragraph is too wordy, please delete

> If you enjoyed the article then please reach out to me on [twitter](https://twitter.com/andricokaroulla?lang=en)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 If you enjoyed the article, or have any questions, please reach out to me on [twitter](https://twitter.com/andricokaroulla?lang=en)!
```

> ### You can also check out my other articles below:

Reviewer: Please remove this section, since these other articles are not directly related to the topic at hand.

[How to use Apollo’s brand new Query components to manage local state](https://medium.com/@andricokaroulla/updated-for-apollo-v2-1-managing-local-state-with-apollo-d1882f2fbb7)

[Add a touch of Suspense to your web app with React.lazy()](https://codeburst.io/add-a-touch-of-suspense-to-your-web-app-with-react-lazy-374e66ee05af)

[No need to wait for the holidays, start Decorating now](https://codeburst.io/no-need-to-wait-for-the-holidays-start-decorating-now-67b9dabd60d7)

[Managing local state with Apollo and Higher Order Components](https://itnext.io/managing-local-state-with-apollo-client-3be522258645)

[The React Conference drinking game](https://medium.com/@andricokaroulla/the-react-conference-drinking-game-7a996bfbef3)

> ### Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: Cool to have this section!

Author: 💯 💯 💯

If you get an error that says ‘lerna: command not found’ after installing it globally, then install it locally as a project dependency and run it using `yarn lerna <command>`.

Running your application:

A lot can go wrong in the first half of the application, so make sure that your files sit in their correct place. Also check you’re importing from the `shared-ui` package correctly.

My first go to when the application doesn’t work as expected is to run `lerna clean` and `lerna bootstrap`. This clears all of your `node_modules` and reinstalls them.

You need `react` specified in the package level `package.json` file to run your application. And you’ll also need `react` and `react-router-dom` specified in the top-level `package.json` to run the tests. This left me stumped, and the only logical reason why I think this happens is because Gatsby only seems to look for React in the package level `node_modules` directory, Since the tests are run from the top level, React also needs to exist there.

My suggestion would be to have the package level react dependency the latest version of React, while the top-level react dependency as version 16.0.0.

> Testing your application:

Reviewer: remove empty sections
